# Philosophy

As a philosopher i would see myself as a classical stoicist, because my thinking is focussed on the questions "Who am i?", "Why am i here?", "Where is my place in the cosmos?", "What are the right actions?" and "How can i be good?". (The final question usually triggers smartassing people telling me, that "good" and "bad" do not exist or are completely subjective. No, they are not - and i will show why later! Those people usually slept during ethics classes.)

I am an apologet of prudence as the mother of all virtues. Unlike intelligence, stealth, shrewdness, smartness and other terms which describe a bare, unempathetic value of "performance" - fitting very well into our biologistic and economic paradigms of performance -, prudence is so much more, because it leads to all the other virtues, like justice, fortitude and temperance. Even this might sound oldschooled and reactionary, it is not: I am a far-left-eco-feminist-vegan activist. Because it is prudent to be one! I do not need sticky, problematic, biologistic justifications or ethical trickery for my actions.

When it comes to mysticism, i am an agnostic. I am not interested in popular atheism and to bash religion everytime everyhwere, which is only an act of being aggressive and disrespectful - sometimes even narcissistic - and "becoming the ones you fight", but from a perspective of reason a concept of an entity which lead to the Prima causa or even a concept of a cosmos without an origin, like propagated by Aristotle, which leads - like Avicenna claimed - to a "god which never had any rest", seem thinkable and interesting to me. So the farest i would go is to call myself a [deist](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deism). All i can say for myself is, that mysticism has played a role in my life as a musician and i had magic moments in the rehearsal room and on stage, but this does not make me a deep and honest believer in an entity i would call "God".

Here are some more of my thoughts:

- "Contra negantem principia non est disputandum" (You cannot discuss with someone who denies the basic principles): This aphorism i read first in Schopenhauer's [The Art of Being Right](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Art_of_Being_Right) is intentionally on the first position, because this is basically the survival kit of modern social media. Don't waste your time with trolls, dickwads, zero empaths and people who know a shit about nothing! Time can be wasted so much better. And even if people claim that this leads to living in "echo chambers" or "bubbles": This is nonsense, because also in everyday life, we always filter out informations, things or people, we do not like or we have no interest in. I cannot recall going to a pub to sit together with right wing esoterics to talk about racism. So why should i socialize with them on social media? And i also do not have the illness of misleaded tolerance, which claims that real tolerance also means to tolerate the intolerant. Read Karl Popper's [The Open Society and Its Enemies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Open_Society_and_Its_Enemies): "We should therefore claim, in the name of tolerance, the right not to tolerate the intolerant." It is called [Paradox of tolerance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paradox_of_tolerance). He relates to Plato's [Politeia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Politeia) in which Plato claims that too much tolerance will destroy the tolerant society. That was the reason, why he was not a big fan of democracy. So very clever people already had very clever thoughts about that. No need to reinvent the wheel!

- "Memento mori" (Remember that you have to die): This could be the perfect justification for living a life of rudeness, selfishness and hedonism, and it sounds a little bit like "Carpe diem" or the very popular "Live each day, as if it were your last" - a sentence you can read on every other Tinder profile -, but for me it is meant in a totally different way: It has nothing to do with squeezing the last drop of achievement or fun out of each day; and also not with with hopelessness, but it always gives me the ability to realign the priorities in my life, to focus on the people, things or activities i love and i care for. It can also help to prevent Megalomania, bring back the awareness of vanitas, help to be more modest and show the right place in the cosmos. There is a legend, that the roman emperors had slaves, which - after a victory - repeated this sentence. I can totally understand why!

- "Ama nesciri" (Love to be unknown) and "We are only dwarfs on the shoulders of giants":
  
  Both aphorisms are about modesty in one way or the other.

  The first one from Thomas à Kempis' [The Imitation of Christ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Imitation_of_Christ) always reminds me, that anonymity is one of the highest privileges. Many people - also me when i was a young musician - dream of fame, believing, that this leads to satisfaction, attention, love and also prosperity. They do not want to see the negative sites, that fame also means a lack of freedom and privacy, because you are followed everywhere, people always recognize you and every little fact of the private life can be seen during the next days in big screaming letters in the yellow press. Having a normal walk in the city, eating ice cream, lying in a bikini on your balcony or any other totally normal everday activity is impossible then. There is no higher privilege than a balanced combination of health, prosperity and anonymity!
  
  The second one from John of Salisburys Metalogicon is a little bit more complex, because it usually means that every achievement is actually built on the shoulders of other peoples achievements. This is a warning to be modest, but also to not reinvent the wheel. As a programmer i have seen people reinventing the wheel in iterations of 5 to 10 years. Every new programming language, system or paradigm is always the panacea; it is thousand times better than the panacea before and can cure every problem and disease. What is mostly overseen is, that - nearly in a manifestation of the well known [Dunning-Kruger effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect) - the generations of programmers before were no idiots! The urge of reducing complexity is complex in itself and also brings up complexity elsewhere. Complexity does not go away, it is just put somewhere else. This can be seen from the perspective of a modern detheologized theodicy program: The balance of having complex thoughts and to use complex systems to reduce complexity is even! The only thing that can be done iteratively is to see, whether the complexity is still in the right place or can be placed somewhere else.

- "Natura parendo vincitur" (Nature, to be commanded, must be obeyed): Francis Bacon has meant it in a different way, then i do, for sure, but after a long illness i learned, that trying to trick, fight or overcome nature usually leads to destruction; even in a medical way. I love the paradox in that aphorism! What i learned from my personal experience is also visible on our planet nowadays: The old idol of mankind tricking, overpowering and controlling nature, of being triumphant, nowadays accelerated by the surrogate religion called "technology", leads to its destruction and in a second step to our own. That does not mean that i am an enemy of technology, like [Theodore Kaczynski](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ted_Kaczynski) and his manifest, obviously i am privileged to participate in technology everyday and do not want to miss many of the achievements of civilization, but the naive reception of technology, the positivism, the search for the holy grail of "world formulas", the panaceas, the philosophers stones, the alkhests, always lead and will lead to being regretful in the end, when Pandora's box is open. Youngest topic is transhumanism, which honestly gives me goose bumps. The total dehumanization of the human; the paradigm of performance and body loss - and therefore the loss of the most basal connection to ourselves - at its peak; perfectly compliant to toxic masculinity - not feeling oneself and the others and therefore always violating limits - and our economic system - calling people "human resources". I have the suspicion that in the end it all leads to the very old dream of immortality; but honestly - as Queen already asked: Who wants to live forever? Interestingly enough, monks during the era of scholasticism were developing the scientific methods and therefore more improved ways to gain technology to make the living circumstances of humans better, without questioning gods Opus magnum; where has this modesty been gone?

  Technology is human made and yet it seems it has its own independent existence and humans are helpless; doomed to only witness its fatal development. No they aren't: Philosophy can help: We have to question - or doubt - more thoroughly; or like in Nietzsche's Nachlass: "We must be more careful than Descartes".

- "Try Again. Fail Again. Fail Better.": This aphorism of Samuel Beckett is actually the opposite of narcissistic thinking. To avoid failure, to not show weaknesses, to not respect the own physical boundaries, to not be human and therefore deficient is what makes many people very ill. The human - as a homo compensator - is a deficient creature from the start. Forgiving ourselves the small failures and missteps and trying to improve is the key to achievement. I learned philosophy, programming and all the musical instruments by myself - as an autodidact - and therefore failure and improvement were a crucial part of the processes, as much as having strong, skillful idols i could learn from by imitation and adaption.

- Moral and ethics: Privilege usually comes with the problem of blindness. This is also the case when it comes to moral and ethics. I hear very often, that "Moral and ethics are purely subjective". Problem with this is, that it already contains a performative contradiction: That the person is able to say this sentence freely and without any threat and that people listen is only possible based on moral and ethics, because there might be societies who would kill for such a saying. Therefore it is already proven wrong. Civilization and society provide achievements and protection. Those achievements were gained based on moral and ethics. The protection is based on moral and ethics. It is not a symbol of libertarianism, but of egoism, to think participating in all the achievements and the protection of civilization and society comes without any obligations; these obligations are to obey the laws and rules, which is morality and to act ethical, which has a more abstract meaning and covers every action which is not covered by the laws and rules.

  Another misconcept is to confuse "evil" and "bad". Evil is really more like a metaphysical term, but even if it seems metaphysical and there is no actual force - like a devil - behind this, we somehow witness evil everyday without getting a grip on it. "Good" and "bad" really exist. Following the [Golden rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Golden_Rule), [Categorical imperative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Categorical_imperative) and also prima facie ethics, actions can intuitively, but also by reason be divided into good and bad actions, whether it is valued by causing no harm or gaining something, like achievements, is irrelevant here. Good actions led to the achievements of civilization and society. One who denies or relativises that is rather blind, lazy, focussing on convenience or tries to justify immoral or unethical behaviour. As simple as that!

  The question about toxic masculinity and also the boundaries of human actions is closely bound to the struggle of our societies to overcome the mode of existence of "normal males", which is directly connected to violence, abuse of power, encroachments and discrimation. My personal work is to make these things visible, because in my personal opinion the "monsters" which are used for fingerpointing, like sexual predators, serial offenders aso. are instrumentalized to draw an artifical line between "monsters" and "normal males". Funnily enough everytime neighbours and friends of those so called "monsters" are interviewed, they were nice everday men, that everyone liked. How is that possible? If we look at the damages of captialism, human and animal exploitation, ongoing wars and other indicators, which accompany humanity for thousands of years, we always find "normal males". It is an ongoing quest - also driven by modern feminism - to detoxify masculinity; and maybe in the end the detoxified man is a woman? Unfortunately we have no historic examples, so it is an ongoing experiment.

- "Little stories": Many of the things we believe in are just "little stories" we keep telling each other for some while. And everytime we reproduce these stories by telling them again, we make them manifest in the reality. In the end we take these manifestations as a proof that they are right. Change starts with a change in the "little stories", we tell each other. For decades people told themselves the story of animals as being "automatons" which have no souls, of lowlifes without intelligence, of creatures that are only her for our food supply, labor or any other pleasure. Recently the stories change step by step and suddenly animals are seen in a different light, as real sentient beings, as family members, as friends, as personalities, as an overall enrichment, as a chance to reflect on ourselves and our way of life.

  Long ago i stopped telling the truth of the humans as "lions", as triumphants, as rulers of the world, but i started to tell the story of the humans as the "homo sentiens", the "feeling human". Compassion and empathy is something which is also learned through the stories we tell each other and as long as we keep up those stories about performance, success and wealth, which perfectly fit into our economic system and biologistic beliefs, the world will be exactly like this: a doomed place in which every day is a fight. We should not forget: Our nations were willing to turn the whole earth into atomic wasteland for the victory of capitalism as the economic system; so it is no wonder we never learned to question it or tell stories about alternatives. Even nowadays any attempt to only phantasize about an alternative will be blight by someone claiming that other systems totally failed, escpecially the evil socialism. I am always surprised then, because for thousands of years it was not capitalism which brought us here. And i am surprised, because throughout history i could easily name 20 utopias which were socialistic in one or the other way. So this idea existed long before socialism. It seems to reflect some basic dream. And inspite of using artificial intelligence and robotics to free humanity from the need of work, it is used for advertising and weaponry; all based on the "best system we ever had" and the ideas of "normal males". Just try to phantasize a future, in which everyone could do voluntary work and we would have everything we need; one step could be to use the technology we already have in its full potential and an unconditional basic income. It all depends on the "little stories" we tell each other everyday. 5% - 10% of the society are enough to make a change. It is a myth that you need a majority to make changes in society! And forget about "normal males" who call their lack of phantasy or their will to keep on ruling "pragmatism".

  "There's always a story. It's all stories, really. The sun coming up every day is a story. Everything's got a story in it. Change the story, change the world." Terry Pratchett

  You want to change the world, change your country. You want to change your country, change your region. You want to change your region, change your city. You want to change your city, change your street. You want to change your street, change your house. You want to change your house, change your family. You want to change your family, change yourself.
